Shawn Keating was born in Limerick in
1889 he died in Dublin in 1977 he became
one of Ireland's best known political
painters among other things he arrived
to Dublin in 1911 to the Dublin
metropolitan school of art where he
trained under William Orban among others
it's very important to remember that the
Dublin metropolitan School of Art at the
time was a hive of political activity
the two Pierce brothers were there Willy
and pouring Willy was teaching Irish
Kantas Markovitz was there and everybody
was really heading towards 1916 and what
happened in 1916 Keita became very well
known for a series of political
paintings the first of which was painted
in 1915 shown in 1917 it's called men of
the West and it is actually in the Hugh
Lane gallery and he finished that series
of political paintings with an allegory
which he painted in 1924 and that's the
painting at which he moves away from
violent separatists nationalism but up
until that point like many in the school
of art he had dared the enocean of
violence and separatist nationalism one
of his very good fans was Sean Mullan
and Sean Moines and headed up one of the
Cork secret what they called flying
columns and it was while doing Sean
moorlands portrait in 1922 the Keating
said room that he'd like to paint one of
the columns which of course is a very
unusual thing to do because these guys
were working in secret and they trained
in secret but it was organized between
Keating and Moylan and nobody knew about
us and there came a time in 1922 when
there was a knock on the school of our
door and the school of art was empty
because the classes were where they're
not running because there was bombs and
Dublin etc and so there was a sort of a
hollow knock on the door and the porter
opened the door and there was a gang of
guys outside with cork accents and big
guns and they said we want to see
Keating and the porter ran up the stairs
and he said to Keating I think you're
going to be shot I think you're going to
be shot and Keating said no no no let
them up now what happened then was a
series of two very famous paintings
called men at the south version one and
men of the South Mercia to both sets of
paintings were done from a series of
photographs and it's important to
remember they were done from photographs
because the guys were in Dublin and they
have to
get out quick the photographs were taken
the guys left and probably went back
down to work on the Train version one
showed Jim Reardon Denis Valentin
Cashman Sean Moylan as seen here Mick
Sullivan John Jones Roger Kiley and Dan
Brown a number of months later Keating
decided to do version two of this
painting version one by the way as it is
owned by the government government
buildings version two for the purposes
of political expediency Shawn boiling
was removed so was Nick Sullivan because
they were becoming very well known it
was a danger therefore for them to be
seen in the painting so version 2 is the
version the core for gallery shows Jim
Reardon John Jones James Cashman
standing in place of Moreland Denis
Milan Roger Kiley and Dan Brown and
interest to me Keating first show this
painting in the munster art exhibition
in 1922 just at the Secession of the
Wars of Independence in 1924 Keating
applied to the Department of Education
and the school of art for time off to
paint a series of history paintings he
was horrified by the violence of the
civil war that we can't even imagine now
and the Department of Education turned
to suppress down by saying the sooner we
forget all these things the better and
what did he do well he had to stay in
the school of art but he went on and he
painted a whole series of different
types of paintings they were on
political paintings the different types
of paintings that told a story of
Ireland but that is another story